In 2005, eccentric hedge fund manager Michael Burry (Christian Bale) discovers that the United States housing market is extremely unstable, being based on high-risk subprime loans. Anticipating that the market will collapse during Q2 2007, as interest rates would rise from adjustable-rate mortgages, he envisions an opportunity to profit. His plan is to create a credit default swap market, allowing him to bet against market-based mortgage-backed securities. He proposes his idea to several major investment and commercial banks who readily accept. Burry's huge long-term bet, exceeding $1 billion, entails paying substantial monthly premiums to the banks. This proviso incurs his clients' ire, believing he is wasting capital, and many demand that he reverse and sell, but Burry refuses. He later discovers that the banks collude with a major bond-rating company to maintain ratings on worthless bonds, allowing them to sell off their losing positions before the true values became known. Under pressure, Burry restricts withdrawals from his fund, angering his investors. Eventually the housing market collapses and his fund's value increases by 489% with an overall profit of over $2.69 billion, but the backlash he receives, coupled with self-disgust, convinces him to close his fund.
Salesman Jared Vennett (Ryan Gosling) is one of the first to understand Burry's analysis, learning about his actions from one of the bankers that sold Burry an early credit default swap. Vennett uses his quant to verify that Burry's predictions are likely true and decides to put his own stake in the market, earning a fee on selling the swaps to firms who'll be profitable when the underlying mortgage bonds fail. A misplaced phone call alerts hedge fund manager Mark Baum (Steve Carell) to his plans, and he is convinced to buy credit default swaps from Vennett due to his own personal distaste with the banks. Vennett explains that the market collapse is being further perpetuated by the packaging of subprime loans into collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) large enough to be considered AAA ratings. Baum sends staff to investigate the Miami housing market and they discover that mortgage brokers are making money by selling risky mortgages to the Wall Street banks, which created the bubble. In early 2007, these loans begin to default, but the prices of the CDOs somehow rose. Meanwhile, ratings agencies refused to downgrade the ratings of these failing bonds. When Baum questions an acquaintance at Standard & Poor's, he discovers conflict of interest and dishonesty amongst the credit rating agencies. When Baum's employees question Vennett's motives, he maintains position and invites Baum and his team to the American Securitization Forum in Las Vegas. Baum interviews CDO manager Wing Chau, who creates CDOs on behalf of an investment bank, claiming to represent the interests of investors. Chau describes how synthetic CDOs make a chain of increasingly large bets on the faulty loans, involving up to 20 times as much money as the loans themselves. Baum horrifyingly realizes that the fraud will completely collapse the global economy and decides to purchase as many swaps as possible, profiting from the situation at the banks' expense. Waiting until the last minute to sell their position, Baum's fund makes a profit of $1 billion, but he laments that the banks won't accept blame for the crisis.
Young investors Charlie Geller (John Magaro) and Jamie Shipley (Finn Wittrock) accidentally discover a prospectus by Vennett, convincing them to become involved in the swaps, as it fits their strategy of buying cheap insurance with big potential payouts. Since they are below the capital threshold for an ISDA Master Agreement required to enter into trades like Burry's and Baum's, they enlist the aid of retired securities trader Ben Rickert (Brad Pitt). When the bond values and CDOs rise despite defaults, Geller suspects the banks of committing fraud. The three also visit the American Securitization Forum, where they learn that the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has no regulations to monitor mortgage-backed security activity. They manage to successfully make an even more profitable payout deal than other hedge funds by shorting the higher-rated mortgage securities. These securities were considered highly stable and the banks were willing to sell swaps on them extremely cheaply. Geller and Shipley are initially ecstatic, but Rickert is disgusted, pointing out an impending economic collapse and that a 1% rise in the unemployment rate is tied to 40,000 deaths. The two are horrified, taking an emotional stake in the collapse by trying to tip off the press and their families about the upcoming disaster and the rampant fraud amongst the big banks. Ultimately, they make a profit of $80 million, but their faith in the system is broken.
In the epilogue, the fate of the main characters are told: Jared Vennett makes $47 million off the selling of swaps. Mark Baum becomes more gracious from the financial fallout, and his staff continue to operate their fund. Charlie Geller and Jamie Shipley go separate ways after failing to sue the ratings agencies, with Charlie moving to Charlotte to start a family, and Jamie still running their fund. Michael Burry decides to invest in water commodities. It's then noted that banks are selling CDOs again under a new label: bespoke tranche opportunity.
